* Sunday (1st Jan) -- 2017 new year, at home

* Monday (2nd Jan) -- NPH/HNH haircut, NPH/PNH/HNH to Sun point to buy
kitchen appliances/utensils 

* Tuesday (3rd) -- NPH/PNH/HNH with NPV to traffic park and Flower show,
HPV/NPV/KPH/HNH to airport to pick-up PHV

* Wednesday (4th) -- NPH/PNH/HNH to CHIPS moving company and misc
shopping, PNH/NPV to city for shopping, Dfai/Jayshreefai came

* Thursday (5th) -- Arunmama/Sugnamami came, PNH/HNH with JPH to Dr.
Parmar for check-up, NPH to Dr. Bhatt eye check-up (still not 100%)

* Friday (6th) -- PNH/HNH to Baroda, NPH/NPV to Nehrunagar

* Saturday (7th) -- at home, working - PNH had ankle sprain in Baroda

* Sunday (8th) -- at home, working

* Monday (9th) -- at home, working, NPV came for few hours, PNH/HNH to
Jayshreeben's place (overnight)

* Tuesday (10th) -- at home, working, NPV came for few hours, Kavli
Fellowship (Cambridge, UK) phone interview

* Wednesday (11th) -- at home, working, NPV came for few hours, PNH/HNH
dinner (Safron restaurant) with Amita/Ketan

* Thursday (12th) -- JPH/KPH to temple, NPH to Dr. Bhatt eye check-up
(close to 100% recovered), PNH/HNH went to see Jayshreeben's program

* Friday (13th) -- NPH/KPH to Rajkot Nagrik and shopping, PNH/HNH came
back from Baroda - NPH to pick-up,  NPH/PNH/HNH with Hirav to buy kites,
Preyas-Priyanka came

* Saturday (14th) -- Uttrayan - kite flying on the terrace, PHV all
came, Lunch at Mango restaurant -Mummy also came, NPH/PNH/HNH to
Shailee-Ninad's place in Akasheth Kuva ni pol to see kite flying

* Sunday (15th) -- Kite flying, lunch at Gopi restaurant (no Mummy, no
Manushi), Jayesh-Kinnari-Kathan came, NPH/PNH/HNH with PHV/NPV/MPV to
Bhadrakali - Tea at Apnaa Addaa cafe

* Monday (16th) -- NPH/PNH/HNH to gold coin complex (jodhpur char rasta)
to buy eye drops, bought other medicines from Hari, Central mall/misc
shopping

* Tuesday (17th) -- NPH/PNH/HNH to Nehrunagar - Mahalakshmi store to buy
HNH clothes, ate Manmohan kharek/hajmahajam

* Wednesday (18th) -- NPH/PNH/HNH to Swastik - via Falguni store, KPH
picked us up - Markwell, and shopping

* Thursday (19th) -- PNH/KPH to shopping - National Handloom

* Friday (20th) -- NPV came for few hours (PHV to Iran for 6 days),
PNH/HNH to Baroda - NPH/NPV to drop-off at Nehrunagar 

* Saturday (21st) -- PNH/HNH with CLD/BCD to Surat by car (PNH mama's
son engagement) - reached at 10.30am and returned to Baroda at 5.30pm,
Nikhilmama and Yogeshmama came

* Sunday (22nd) -- PNH/HNH back from Baroda - NPH/KPH to pick-up, drive
to get Divyabhaskar's gift (tub), ICICI ATM withdraw (for KPH)

* Monday (23rd) -- at home, NPV not feeling well

* Tuesday (24th) -- PNH/HNH to Swastik - came back with KPH

* Wednesday (25th) -- NPV/MPV/CHV came for ~1 hour

* Thursday (26th) -- JPH/KPH and N-P-H went to Siddhivinayak temple at
Mahemdabad (~1 hour drive one way)

* Friday (27th) -- at home, NPV (and Hirav) came 

* Saturday (28th) -- NPH/PNH/HNH with JPH to Dr. Parmar for check-up,
PHV came back from Iran/Dubai - brought VFit band 

* Sunday (29th) -- JPH/KPH/N-P-H to Geetamasi's vastu function - lunch
at Radhe gujarati restaurant - NPH drove to Gandhinagar, PHV/NPV/HPV
also came, Mehtabhai family and Haritbhai family came to invite for
weddings

* Monday (30th) -- NPH to haircut, N-P-H to Pantaloon - clothes shopping
for NPH/HNH 

* Tuesday (31st) -- N-P-H to Crossword (bought HNH activity books), Bata
(no purchase)



* Wednesday (1st Feb) -- at home (watched India-England T20 match),
STScI submitted H1B application/petition to USCIS 

* Thursday (2nd) -- JPH/NPH to Akhilkaki's besna (Kulinkaka Mankar)

* Friday (3rd) -- JPH/KPH with N-P-H to Uncle Sam's Pizza for lunch,
NPV's place, shopping at Raj stationary

* Saturday (4th) -- N-P-H with KPH to Top-in-town to buy HNH clothes,
PNH/KPH ate panipuri, Karnavati shoe market to buy HNH shoes and NPH
slippers

* Sunday (5th) -- N-P-H to Pantaloons, Manmandir (pathani), ate Ajit
sandwich, Top-in-town exchange

* Monday (6th) -- at home, H1B application receipt (dated 2nd Feb), NPV
came, CLD court notice

* Tuesday (7th) -- at home, filling online DS-160 visa forms 

* Wednesday (8th) -- at home

* Thursday (9th) -- at home, H1B application - request for evidence/RFE
(will take more time now)

* Friday (10th) -- at home

* Saturday (11th) -- N-P-H with JPH to Mayurmama's place for
dinner/bhajans - NPH drove

* Sunday (12th) -- N-P-H with JPH/KPH to Mehtabhai's place (Sabarmati)
for wedding function/lunch

* Monday (13th) -- at home

* Tuesday (14th) -- NPH/PNH to 'Jolly LLB-2' movie at Alpha Mall, HNH at
Swastik - KPH pick-up

* Wednesday (15th) -- PNH to Baroda (NPH/HNH to drop-off), JPH/KPH to
weddings - NPH/HNH at home

* Thursday (16th) -- NPH/HNH with JPH/KPH to Haritbhai's daughter
wedding/lunch, PNH/CLD all went to Nadiad court - notice/warrant was
issued by mistake, PNH back to Abad

* Friday (17th) -- NPV came (PHV to Dubai), N-P-H to Kankaria -  dinner
at Swati restaurant (near law garden) 

* Saturday (18th) -- JPH/PNH/HNH to Dfai place, N-P-H to NPV place,
N-P-H with NPV/CHV dinner at Jassi de paratha, PHV back late-night

* Sunday (19th) -- Hot temps - HNH/PNH stomach upset, N-P-H with
PHV/NPV/HPV for a ride in the city

* Monday (20th) -- at home, PHV to Jordan 

* Tuesday (21st) -- at home

* Wednesday (22nd) -- N-P-H to Vipul dudhiya/Deepak medical

* Thursday (23rd) -- H1B application RFE submitted, NPV/CHV/HPV came at
night

* Friday (24th) -- JPH/KPH/PNH with NPV/CHV/MPV to see gujarati movie
('Duniyadari'), NPH/HNH at home

* Saturday (25th) -- PHV back, N-P-H with KPH to Dholeshwar Shiv temple
(near Gandhinagar) and Camp Hanuman

* Sunday (26th) -- at home

* Monday (27th) -- PNH/NPV with JPH to Dr. Parmar for check-up

* Tuesday (28th) -- at home



* Wednesday (1st Mar) -- at home 

* Thursday (2nd Mar) -- at home, PNH/HNH to Swastik

* Friday (3rd Mar) -- H1B application approved, N-P-H with JPH/KPH to
Ambaji, Gabbar/cable car, and Unja (Umyamata) in a taxi -- 8.30am to
9.00pm -- 457 kms, on return visited Kalubhai's cafe for fast food

* Saturday (4th Mar) -- PNH/HNH with KPH at Swastik, dinner for all at
Birenbhai's place, submitted DS-160 applications online 

* Sunday (5th Mar) -- P-N-H with JPH/KPH and PHV/NPV/CHV/MPV to see
gujarati drama 'Yugpurush', horse cart ride and some games at law garden
for HNH before drama, after drama dinner at 'Dakshinayan' south indian
restaurant (Hirav also came, JPH/KPH at home)

* Monday (6th) -- Online paid H1B/H4 visa fees (Rs 26600), interview
appointment at Mumbai Consulate on 22nd/23rd 

* Tuesday (7th) -- at home

* Wednesday (8th) -- at home

* Thursday (9th) -- at home

* Friday (10th) -- N-P-H with KPH to Kankaria Zoo and Balvatika, HNH to
Swastik (NPH/PNH dropped off and came at night with PHV all)

* Saturday (11th) -- KPH/CHV to movie (Jolly LLB 2), JPH to Dfai place,
N-P-H picked-up KPH, shopping at 'The Godfather' (NPH clothes), dinner
at 'Bikanerwala'

* Sunday (12th) -- Holi - N-P-H, JPH/KPH, PHV all for lunch at 'Barbeque
Nation' restaurant (our treat), Holy darshan, N-P-H walk

* Monday (13th) -- Dhuleti, N-P-H with KPH went to Swastik to play Holi
(around 10am), Kruti, Jay, Jyot came, N-P-H with PHV/NPV/HPV to YMCA

* Tuesday (14th) -- at home, received H1B approval notice thru FedEx,
booked Mumbai flights thru Mitulaben

* Wednesday (15th) -- NPV came, HNH went to Swastik (came back at
night), NPH/PNH to Tushar Xerox -- printed visa documents, booked Mumbai
Ibis hotel

* Thursday (16th) -- at home

* Friday (17th) -- NPV came (PHV to Egypt/Dubai)

* Saturday (18th) -- PNH/KPH/HNH to shopping (masala, cosmetics),
parlor, high court 

* Sunday (19th) -- at home

* Monday (20th) -- NPV came, P-N-H with NPV to Xerox, Kandoi, Mukhwas
shop

* Tuesday (21st) -- at home (PHV came back at late-night)

* Wednesday (22nd) -- P-N-H to Mumbai by Indigo flight at 9.20am,
reached at 11am, stay at Ibis (Airport) hotel, ate airport fast food,
Visa OFC (finger print, photo) at 2.30pm (paid Rs 200 for 20 min locker
to keep mobile), ate Pizza/Khus cold drink, back to hotel at 3pm, took
rest, at 5pm went to Hemaben/Hamirbhai's place - had Pau-bhaji dinner,
came back to hotel at 10pm

* Thursday (23rd) -- breakfast in the hotel, 10am appointment at US
Consulate, unable to find any locker for mobile phones and wrist band,
gave auto rickshaw driver Rs 600 for 2 hours to keep those things, long
lines - very hot, unfortunately visa was not approved -- need more info
(status pending), came back to hotel at 12.30pm, 2pm to airport, ate
shiv-sagar food (pizza, sandwich), back to Abad by 4.50pm flight, Mummy
came to pick-up

* Friday (24th) -- at home, NPV came - started security at night after
one person was caught on CCTV trying to enter Nandanvan - he tried 2-3
days in a row

* Saturday (25th) -- HNH hair cut, NPH/KPH/HNH to police station to
submit a complaint, Nandanvan gate updated

* Sunday (26th) -- at home, working US consulate papers, very hot temp
(40+ C) started

* Monday (27th) -- at home, emailed US consulate papers to Lee/Marvin/Cora

* Tuesday (28th) -- at home, got feedback from Cora - updated letter

* Wednesday (29th) -- at home, updated US Consulate papers

* Thursday (30th) -- submitted papers to US consulate thru email,
JPH/KPH/PNH/HNH to Birenbhai's place for garba - NPH at home, HNH went
to Swastik - came back at night

* Friday (31st) -- JPH/KPH/PNH/HNH to Birenbhai's place for garba - NPH
at home



* Saturday (1st Apr) -- JPH/PNH to Birenbhai's place for garba - NPH at
home, KPH/HNH to park, Nandanvan gate color

* Sunday (2nd) -- All to Birenbhai's place for garba and then Swastik

* Monday (3rd) -- JPH/KPH/PNH to Birenbhai's place for garba - NPH/HNH
at home

* Tuesday (4th) -- JPH/KPH to Birenbhai's place in the morning for
havan, KPH/P-N-H to see apartments - saw Enigma, Etermia, Sky Eleven,
Bellevue

* Wednesday (5th) -- All (incl. NPV) to Birenbhai's place for lunch,
PNH/HNH to Baroda in the afternoon, IPL matches started

* Thursday (6th) -- at home

* Friday (7th) -- NPH haircut, Rakshit family came in the evening

* Saturday (8th) -- NPH/KPH to see apartments (Sneh-shrusti, Swastik
park, Casavyoma), NPV came in the afternoon - saw gujarati comedy on TV
(Ashmit Parv - Sugnamami in audience)

* Sunday (9th) -- at home, PHV/MPV went to see Casavyoma apartments

* Monday (10th) -- at home

* Tuesday (11th) -- NPV came, PNH/HNH came back from Baroda

* Wednesday (12th) -- at home, HNH/PNH regularly going to the park in
the evening

* Thursday (13th) -- NPV came, JPH/PNH/NPV went to see Casavyoma
apartments, plan to visit Somnath or Mt Abu in the long weekend cancelled

* Friday (14th) -- JPH/PNH/KPH/HNH for veggie/grocery shopping, dinner
at Schzante Sizzlers restaurant with PHV all, Someshwar ice gola

* Saturday (15th) -- JPH all to Atithi gujarati thali for lunch

* Sunday (16th) -- Arunmama/Sugnamami came in the evening, stayed
overnight, PHV/NPV/MPV came late to meet mama-mami

* Monday (17th) -- HNH started 3-week summer camp at Olive Green
Pre-school (Rs. 3500), 10am to Noon (NPH-PNH to drop-off, PNH to
pick-up), Filed France IT return (online)

* Tuesday (18th) -- HNH school, PNH to drop-off/pick-up

* Wednesday (19th) -- HNH school, PNH/JPH to drop-off, PNH to pick-up,
JPH/KPH/PNH to see apartments (Ratnakar, Swastik)

* Thursday (20th) -- HNH school, Manushi's graduation day - completed
MBA from Nirma University

* Friday (21st) -- HNH school, NPH-PNH to drop-off and pick-up, Finally
got an email from US Consulate to send passport, N-P-H/KPH to see
apartments in Bopal (Swapneel, Binori, Garden Residency)

* Saturday (22nd) -- Harshadafai, Devifai came in the evening, NPH-PNH
to Xerox, KPH/HNH to park, N-P-H to Amidhara

* Sunday (23rd) -- JPH/KPH/HNH to Swastik - JPH to meet Mayurmama all,
HNH stayed at Swastik till evening, NPH/PNH to pick-up HNH 

* Monday (24th) -- HNH school, NPH-PNH to drop-off and pick-up (on
scooter), NPH-PNH to US visa center (Gujarat Chambers) to submit
passports

* Tuesday (25th) -- HNH school, PNH to drop-off, N-P pick-up (on
scooter) 

* Wednesday (26th) -- HNH school, PNH to drop-off, N-P pick-up (on
scooter), NPV came in the afternoon

* Thursday (27th) -- HNH school, PNH to drop-off, N-P pick-up (on
scooter), PHV all came at 9pm to discuss flat/Nandanvan issues,
PNH/HNH/MPV/HPV went for a drive

* Friday (28th) -- HNH school, KPH to drop-off, N-P pick-up (on
scooter), N-P-H with KPH drive to see lights (for 1st May celebration) 

* Saturday (29th) -- N-P-H with KPH to see apartments (Arvind Citadel,
Advance/Law Garden), passport photos at Sun Point

* Sunday (30th) -- at home, PHV all to Rajkot



* Monday (1st May) -- HNH at home - suffering from cold

* Tuesday (2nd May) -- HNH school, NPH-PNH to drop-off and PNH to
pick-up, NPH-PNH to US visa center (Gujarat Chambers) to pick-up NPH
passport, H1B visa approved for 2 years, Bought UTI Mutual Funds thru
Nirav, N-P-H/KPH/JPH to see apartment (Status Residency)

* Wednesday (3rd) -- HNH school, PNH to drop-off and PNH-NPH to pick-up,
NPH-PNH to US visa center (Gujarat Chambers) to pick-up PNH passport,
sugarcane juice

* Thursday (4th) -- HNH school, PNH to drop-off and pick-up, NPH/PNH to
InvestMentor - sold shares of few companies, PNH/HNH to Keyurbhai's
clinic - PNH has throat infection/cold, Booking (thru STScI Travel
agency) Etihad flight to US on 18th

* Friday (5th) -- HNH school, PNH to drop-off and PNH/NPV to pick-up,
NPH/PNH to Xerox and watch pick-up, N-P-H to Mahavir (PNH clothes
shopping), NPH dropped off PNH/HNH to Swastik for overnight stay

* Saturday (6th) -- N-P-H/KPH with NPV/MPV/CHV to Book fair, N-P-H with
MPV/NPV to shopping and dinner at Shivam (South Indian + Chinese),
PNH/HNH back home

* Sunday (7th) -- at home 

* Monday (8th) -- N-P-H to Chips International to book moving cargo,
booked rental car from IAD airport

* Tuesday (9th) -- PNH to parlor in the afternoon, HNH at home

* Wednesday (10th) -- N-P-H to Baroda, Volvo at 10:45am, KPH drove,
reached Baroda at 1:00pm, Met Ninad, Belakaki all, PNH/BCD to Airtel

* Thursday (11th) -- PNH to Airtel (for monthly postpaid plan for BCD),
left Baroda at 5.30pm (45 min wait at bus stop), reached Abad at 7:45pm,
booked Radisson hotel for temporary housing

* Friday (12th) -- at home, Tejalbhai family came

* Saturday (13th) -- Tushar Xerox, Got foreign exchange ($2000), All
went to Vishala for dinner (NPH drive)

* Sunday (14th) -- at home, Chips moving -- packers spent 5 hours
(2.30pm to 7.30pm)

* Monday (15th) -- NPH/HNH hair cut, NPH/PNH to shopping (NPH short,
Medicines) and Keyurbhai's clinic, Evening - Pinakinmama/Divyamami came
with NPV, N-P-H with KPH to Devyanifai's place for dinner, N_P to Chips
to pay and finalize

* Tuesday (16th) -- BoB locker, bought UTI MF thru Nirav, packing,
NPH/KPH with PHV to meet Chirag at CasaVoyma, N-P-H with KPH to buy HNH
sandal at Suvidha

* Wednesday (17th) -- packing

* Thursday (18th) -- Early morning around 1am left for airport,
PHV/NPV/MPV/HPV came in 2 cars to drop us -- 5 big bags, 4 hand bags,
all check-in bags over weight, used Etihad box to remove some stuff and
made that box 6th check-in item, reached boarding gate 3.30am, Eithad
flight to Abu Dhabi departed at 5am, all sleeping, reached Abu Dhabi at
6.40am (around 8.10am in India), airport security, change to terminal 3,
US security and immigration at Abu Dhabi airport - long line, took near
1-2 hours, Etihad flight to Washington Dulles (IAD) airport departed at
10:45am -- ~14 hours flight
